DOCSP-39895: Bulk write guide (#117)
mongodb/docs-rust: source/fundamentals/crud/write-operations/bulk.txt

.. _rust-bulk-guide:

===============
Bulk Operations
===============

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use **bulk operations**.

Bulk operations perform multiple write operations against one or more

> namespaces. Instead of making a call to the database for each operation,

Reviewer: You can also indicate that the `bulk_write()` method is in the `Client` class, which enables this feature against any namespace in the cluster

Sample Data
-----------

The examples in this guide use the following sample documents, which
are modeled as ``Mushroom`` structs and stored in the ``db.mushrooms``
namespace:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/crud/bulk.rs
   :language: rust
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin-sample-data
   :end-before: end-sample-data

.. _bulk-operation-types:

Bulk Operation Types
--------------------

To perform a bulk write operation, pass an array of ``WriteModel`` struct instances to the 
``bulk_write()`` method. 

In this section, you can learn how to perform the following bulk write operations
by defining their corresponding ``WriteModel`` struct types:

- :ref:`Bulk insert operations <bulk-insert-operation>`
- :ref:`Bulk replace operations <bulk-replace-operation>`
- :ref:`Bulk update operations <bulk-update-operation>`
- :ref:`Bulk delete operations <bulk-delete-operation>`

.. tip::

  You can also perform multiple types of write operations in a single ``bulk_write()``
  method call. For an example that passes a ``DeleteOneModel`` and an ``InsertOneModel`` to
  the same ``bulk_write()`` call, see the :ref:`Modify Behavior example <bulk-opts-example>`

>   on this page.

Reviewer: S: fix indentation

>   method call. For an example that passes a ``DeleteOneModel`` and an ``InsertOneModel`` to
>   the same ``bulk_write()`` call, see the :ref:`Modify Behavior example <bulk-opts-example>`
>   on this page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  method call. To view an example that passes a ``DeleteOneModel`` and an ``InsertOneModel`` to
  the same ``bulk_write()`` call, see the :ref:`Modify Behavior example <bulk-opts-example>`
  on this page.
```

      :start-after: begin-insert
      :end-before: end-insert
      :language: rust
      :dedent:

   .. output:: 
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      Inserted documents: 2

.. _bulk-replace-operation:

Replace
~~~~~~~

To perform a bulk replace operation, create a ``ReplaceOneModel`` instance for each document
you want to replace.

To construct a ``ReplaceOneModel``, specify the following struct fields:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 30 70
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Field
     - Description

   * - ``namespace`` 
     - | The namespace on which the operation is performed.
       | Type: ``Namespace``

   * - ``filter`` 
     - | The filter that matches the document you want to replace.
       | Type: ``Document``

   * - ``replacement`` 
     - | The replacement document.
       | Type: ``Document``

   * - ``collation`` 
     - | (Optional) The collation to use when sorting results. To learn more about collations,
       | see the :ref:`rust-collations` guide.
       | Type: ``Document``

   * - ``hint`` 
     - | (Optional) The index to use for the operation. To learn more about
       | indexes, see :manual:`Indexes </indexes/>` in the Server

>        | manual.

Reviewer: S: link to rust indexes guide instead?

- Prints the number of modified documents.

.. io-code-block::

   .. input:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/crud/bulk.rs
      :start-after: begin-replace
      :end-before: end-replace
      :language: rust
      :dedent:

   .. output:: 
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      Modified documents: 2

.. _bulk-update-operation:

Update
~~~~~~

To perform a bulk update operation, create an ``UpdateOneModel`` or ``UpdateManyModel``
instance for each update you want to make. An ``UpdateOneModel`` updates only one
document that matches a filter, while an ``UpdateManyModel`` updates all documents that match
a filter.

To construct an ``UpdateOneModel`` or an ``UpdateManyModel``, specify the following struct fields:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 30 70
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Field
     - Description

   * - ``namespace`` 
     - | The namespace on which the operation is performed.
       | Type: ``Namespace``

   * - ``filter`` 
     - | The filter that matches one or more documents you want to update. When specified in an ``UpdateOneModel``,
       | only the first matching document will be updated. When specified in an ``UpdateManyModel``, all

>        | matching documents will be updated.

Reviewer: I: remove the newline breaks `|` from the beginning of each line in the paragraph

Reviewer: Applies everywhere you might have done this

       | Type: ``Document``

   * - ``update`` 
     - | The update to perform.
       | Type: ``UpdateModifications``

   * - ``array_filters`` 

>      - | (Optional) A set of filters specifying which array elements an update applies to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - | (Optional) A set of filters specifying which array elements an update applies to if you are updating an array-valued field.
```

       | Values must be constant or closed expressions that do not reference document fields.
       | Type: ``Document``
     - ``None``

   * - ``write_concern``
     - | The write concern to use for this bulk operation.
       | Type: ``WriteConcern``
     - Inherits the namespace's write concern

.. _bulk-opts-example:

Example
~~~~~~~

The following example sets the ``ordered`` field to ``false`` by chaining the ``ordered()`` method
to the ``bulk_write()`` method: 

.. io-code-block::

   .. input:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/crud/bulk.rs
      :start-after: begin-options
      :end-before: end-options
      :language: rust
      :dedent:

   .. output:: 
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      Inserted documents: 1
      Deleted documents: 0

Since the filter specified in the ``DeleteOneModel`` does not match any documents, the code
performs only an insert operation. If you do not set the ``ordered`` field to ``false``, the bulk
operation will not attempt any subsequent operations after the unsuccessful delete and will not
insert the specified document.

.. _bulk-mixed-namespaces:

Write to Mixed Namespaces

> -------------------------

Reviewer: S: link to this section earlier in the page. Maybe you can create a TOC like on some of the other CRUD rust pages

Reviewer: Oh I must have missed it, but the TOC you added addresses this comment!

The preceding examples on this page perform bulk operations on the ``db.mushrooms`` namespace. However,
you can perform bulk writes on multiple namespaces in a single method call.

The following example inserts one document into the ``db.mushrooms`` namespace and one document into
the ``people.students`` namespace:

> 

Reviewer: Q: could you refactor this example to be more intuitive? Perhaps you could rename the `db` database to be `ingredients` and the second namespace could be `recipes.dinner` or something

Reviewer: Just to have some association for why a user might be doing both in the same operation

Author: Makes sense, updated!

.. _rust-bulk-guide:

===============
Bulk Operations
===============

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

> In this guide, you can learn how to perform **bulk operations**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, you can learn how to use the {+driver-short+} to perform **bulk operations**.
```

> Bulk operations perform multiple write operations against one or more
> namespaces, which refer to a database name and a collection name in
> ``<database>.<collection>`` form. Since the bulk operation method is in 
> the ``Client`` class, you can perform bulk operations against any namespace
> in your cluster. 

Reviewer: S; use wording from the [Server glossary](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/glossary/#:~:text=the%20preferred%20shell.-,namespace,-A%20namespace%20is)

```suggestion
Bulk operations perform multiple write operations against one or more
**namespaces**. A namespace is a combination of the database name and the collection name, in the format
``<database>.<collection>``. Since you perform bulk operations on a
the ``Client`` instance, you can perform bulk operations against any namespace
in the cluster accessed by your client.
```

> Instead of making a call to the database for each operation, bulk operations
> perform multiple operations within one call to the database.

Reviewer: S: right now, this sentence seems a little isolated, maybe you can make this a description of why one might use bulk ops.
```suggestion
You might perform a bulk operation to reduce the number of calls to the server. Instead of sending
a request for each operation, bulk operations perform multiple operations within one action.
```

This guide includes the following sections:

- :ref:`rust-bulk-sample-data`
- :ref:`rust-bulk-operation-types`
- :ref:`rust-bulk-modify-behavior`
- :ref:`rust-bulk-mixed-namespaces`
- :ref:`rust-bulk-addtl-info`

> 

Reviewer: S: add a short descriptive sentence to the section headers, as done here: https://github.com/mongodb/docs-rust/blob/330f2d7c8b4ac245672a1c5c80cc0f86db610307/source/fundamentals/crud/read-operations/retrieve.txt#L32-L45

-----------

The examples in this guide use the following sample documents, which
are stored in the ``mushrooms`` collection in the ``db`` database:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/crud/bulk.rs
   :language: rust
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin-sample-data
   :end-before: end-sample-data

.. _rust-bulk-operation-types:

Bulk Operation Types
--------------------

To perform a bulk write operation, pass an array of ``WriteModel`` struct instances to the 
``bulk_write()`` method. 

In this section, you can learn how to perform the following bulk write operations
by defining their corresponding ``WriteModel`` struct types:

- :ref:`Bulk insert operations <rust-bulk-insert-operation>`
- :ref:`Bulk replace operations <rust-bulk-replace-operation>`
- :ref:`Bulk update operations <rust-bulk-update-operation>`
- :ref:`Bulk delete operations <rust-bulk-delete-operation>`

.. tip::

   You can also perform multiple types of write operations in a single ``bulk_write()``
   method call. To view an example that passes a ``DeleteOneModel`` and an ``InsertOneModel`` to
   the same ``bulk_write()`` call, see the :ref:`Modify Behavior example <rust-bulk-opts-example>`

>    on this page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   in this guide.
```

.. _rust-bulk-insert-operation:

Insert
~~~~~~

> To perform a bulk insert operation, create an ``InsertOneModel`` instance for each document
> you want to insert.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To perform a bulk insert operation, create an ``InsertOneModel`` instance for each document
you want to insert, then pass a list of models to the ``bulk_write()`` method.
```

Reviewer: add this clause to all sections

Replace
~~~~~~~

To perform a bulk replace operation, create a ``ReplaceOneModel`` instance for each document
you want to replace.

To construct a ``ReplaceOneModel``, specify the following struct fields:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 30 70
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Field
     - Description

   * - ``namespace`` 
     - | The namespace on which the operation is performed.
       | Type: ``Namespace``

   * - ``filter`` 
     - | The filter that matches the document you want to replace.
       | Type: ``Document``

   * - ``replacement`` 
     - | The replacement document.
       | Type: ``Document``

   * - ``collation`` 
     - | (Optional) The collation to use when sorting results. To learn more about collations,
         see the :ref:`rust-collations` guide.
       | Type: ``Document``

   * - ``hint`` 
     - | (Optional) The index to use for the operation. To learn more about
         indexes, see the :ref:`rust-indexes` guide.
       | Type: ``Bson``

   * - ``upsert`` 
     - | (Optional) Whether a new document is created if no document matches the filter.
       | By default, this field is set to ``false``.
       | Type: ``bool``

Example
```````

> This example performs the following actions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This example performs the following actions:
```

   * - ``let_vars``
     - | A map of parameter names and values to apply to all operations within the bulk write.
         Values must be constant or closed expressions that do not reference document fields.
       | Type: ``Document``
     - ``None``

   * - ``write_concern``
     - | The write concern to use for this bulk operation.
       | Type: ``WriteConcern``
     - Inherits the namespace's write concern

.. _rust-bulk-opts-example:

Example
~~~~~~~

The following example sets the ``ordered`` field to ``false`` by chaining the ``ordered()`` method
to the ``bulk_write()`` method: 

.. io-code-block::

   .. input:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/crud/bulk.rs
      :start-after: begin-options
      :end-before: end-options
      :language: rust
      :dedent:

   .. output:: 
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      Inserted documents: 1
      Deleted documents: 0

Since the filter specified in the ``DeleteOneModel`` does not match any documents, the code
performs only an insert operation. If you do not set the ``ordered`` field to ``false``, the bulk
operation will not attempt any subsequent operations after the unsuccessful delete and will not

> insert the specified document.

Reviewer: S: I dont think this is true, I think that the unsuccessful delete does not return an error that will abort the operation. Instead, you could provide an example that raises a duplicate key error or something, as this would abort the operation

Author: You're right, thanks for catching this - fixed

   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin-sample-data
   :end-before: end-sample-data

.. _rust-bulk-operation-types:

Bulk Operation Types
--------------------

To perform a bulk write operation, pass an array of ``WriteModel`` struct instances to the 
``bulk_write()`` method. 

In this section, you can learn how to perform the following bulk write operations
by defining their corresponding ``WriteModel`` struct types:

- :ref:`Bulk insert operations <rust-bulk-insert-operation>`
- :ref:`Bulk replace operations <rust-bulk-replace-operation>`
- :ref:`Bulk update operations <rust-bulk-update-operation>`
- :ref:`Bulk delete operations <rust-bulk-delete-operation>`

.. tip::

   You can also perform multiple types of write operations in a single ``bulk_write()``
   method call. To view an example that passes an ``UpdateOneModel`` and an ``InsertOneModel`` to
   the same ``bulk_write()`` call, see the :ref:`Modify Behavior example <rust-bulk-opts-example>`
   in this guide.

.. _rust-bulk-insert-operation:

Insert
~~~~~~

To perform a bulk insert operation, create an ``InsertOneModel`` instance for each document
you want to insert. Then, pass a list of models to the ``bulk_write()`` method.

> To construct an ``InsertOneModel``, specify the following struct fields:

Reviewer: S: introduce this table (and in other sections) by clarifying that you set these fields by using the corresponding builder methods.

   :header-rows: 1

   * - Field
     - Description
     - Default Value

   * - ``ordered`` 
     - | Whether the operations run in the order in which they were specified.
       | When set to ``true``, the driver does not perform subsequent write operations if one operation fails.
       | When set to ``false``, the driver continues to attempt write operations if one fails.
       | Type: ``bool``
     - ``true``

   * - ``bypass_document_validation``
     - | Whether document-level validation is bypassed.
       | Type: ``bool``
     - ``false``

   * - ``comment``
     - | An arbitrary comment to help trace the operation through the database profiler, currentOp,
         and logs.
       | Type: ``Bson``
     - ``None``

   * - ``let_vars``
     - | A map of parameter names and values to apply to all operations within the bulk write.
         Values must be constant or closed expressions that do not reference document fields.
       | Type: ``Document``
     - ``None``

   * - ``write_concern``
     - | The write concern to use for this bulk operation.
       | Type: ``WriteConcern``
     - Inherits the namespace's write concern

.. _rust-bulk-opts-example:

Example
~~~~~~~

> The following example sets the ``ordered`` field to ``false`` by chaining the ``ordered()`` method
> to the ``bulk_write()`` method: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example attempts to perform update and insert operations on the ``mushrooms`` collection
and sets the ``ordered`` field to ``false`` by chaining the ``ordered()`` method
to the ``bulk_write()`` method: 
```

.. io-code-block::

   .. input:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/crud/bulk.rs
      :start-after: begin-options
      :end-before: end-options
      :language: rust
      :dedent:

   .. output:: 
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      Error: Error { kind: BulkWrite(BulkWriteError { write_concern_errors: [], write_errors:
      {0: WriteError { code: 66, code_name: None, message: "Plan executor error during update ::
      caused by :: Performing an update on the path '_id' would modify the immutable field '_id'",
      details: None }}, partial_result: Some(Summary(SummaryBulkWriteResult { inserted_count: 1,
      matched_count: 0, modified_count: 0, upserted_count: 0, deleted_count: 0 })) }),
      labels: ... }

> The ``_id`` field is immutable and cannot be changed in an update operation. Since the ``UpdateOneModel``
> includes instructions to update this field, the bulk operation generates a ``BulkWriteError`` and performs
> only an insert operation. If you do not set the ``ordered`` field to ``false``, the bulk operation will not
> attempt any subsequent operations after the unsuccessful update and will not insert the specified document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``_id`` field is immutable and cannot be changed in an update operation. Since the ``UpdateOneModel``
includes instructions to update this field, the bulk operation returns a ``BulkWriteError`` and performs
only the insert operation. If you set the ``ordered`` field to ``true``, the driver does not
attempt any subsequent operations after the unsuccessful update operation, and the driver does not insert any documents.
```

  contain instructions to delete documents representing mushrooms in the
  ``db.mushrooms`` namespace.
- Passes the array of models to the ``bulk_write()`` method.
- Prints the number of deleted documents.

.. io-code-block::

   .. input:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/crud/bulk.rs
      :start-after: begin-delete
      :end-before: end-delete
      :language: rust
      :dedent:

   .. output:: 
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      Deleted documents: 4

.. _rust-bulk-modify-behavior:

Modify Behavior
---------------

You can modify the behavior of the ``bulk_write()`` method by setting ``BulkWriteOptions`` field
values. To set these struct fields, chain the fields' corresponding methods to the ``bulk_write()``
method.

The ``BulkWriteOptions`` struct contains the following fields:

.. list-table::
   :widths: 20 60 20
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Field
     - Description
     - Default Value

   * - ``ordered`` 
     - | Whether the operations run in the order in which they were specified.
       | When set to ``true``, the driver does not perform subsequent write operations if one operation fails.

>        | When set to ``false``, the driver continues to attempt write operations if one fails.

Reviewer 2: Very minor, but the actual continue-on-error behavior is done by the server, not the driver. I'd remove mention of the driver here.

   :start-after: begin-sample-data
   :end-before: end-sample-data

> You can also use custom struct types to represent your sample data. For
> an example that performs a bulk operation using the ``Mushroom`` struct type,
> see the :ref:`bulk-insert-structs-example` on this page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use custom struct types to represent your sample data. For
an example that performs a bulk operation by using ``Mushroom`` structs to model the same data,
see the :ref:`bulk-insert-structs-example` on this page.
```

      Inserted documents: 2

.. _bulk-insert-structs-example:

Insert Structs Example
``````````````````````

> You can also model your documents as structs and insert them into the ``db.mushrooms`` namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also model your documents by using structs and bulk insert struct instances
into the ``db.mushrooms`` namespace.
```

This example performs the same operation as the preceding :ref:`bulk-insert-docs-example` but
inserts instances of the following ``Mushroom`` struct type:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/crud/bulk.rs
   :language: rust
   :dedent:
   :start-after: begin-mushroom-struct
   :end-before: end-mushroom-struct

> The following code uses the ``insert_one_model()`` method to construct an ``InsertOneModel``
> from each ``Mushroom`` instance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code uses the ``insert_one_model()`` method to construct an ``InsertOneModel``
from each ``Mushroom`` instance, then inserts both models in a bulk operation:
```

      Deleted documents: 4

.. _rust-bulk-return-vals:

> See Bulk Write Results
> ----------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Return Type
------------
```

The ``bulk_write()`` method returns a ``SummaryBulkWriteResult`` struct instance from which
you can access information about your bulk operation.

The ``SummaryBulkWriteResult`` type has the following fields:

- ``inserted_count``: the number of inserted documents
- ``matched_count``: the number of matched documents
- ``modified_count``: the number of updated documents
- ``upserted_count``: the number of upserted documents
- ``deleted_count``: the number of deleted documents

> You can also use the ``verbose_results()`` method to see more detailed information about each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use the ``verbose_results()`` method to see detailed information about each
```

operation. The ``verbose_results()`` method returns a ``VerboseBulkWriteResult`` struct
instance, which has the following fields:

- ``delete_results``: the results of each successful delete operation
- ``insert_results``: the results of each successful insert operation
- ``update_results``: the results of each successful update operation
- ``summary``: a summary of the results of each operation type

The following example chains the ``verbose_results()`` method to the ``bulk_write()`` method
and prints a summary of the bulk operation:

.. io-code-block::

   .. input:: /includes/fundamentals/code-snippets/crud/bulk.rs
      :start-after: begin-verbose
      :end-before: end-verbose
      :language: rust
      :dedent:

   .. output:: 
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      SummaryBulkWriteResult { inserted_count: 0, matched_count: 1, modified_count: 1,

>       upserted_count: 0, deleted_count: 1 }

Reviewer: Q: if this example uses the `verbose_results()` method, why is it printing a `SummaryBulkWriteResult` instead of a `VerboseBulkWriteResult` result?

Author: `verbose_results()` returns a `VerboseBulkWriteResult`, but the `summary` field of the `VerboseBulkWriteResult` (which is what I'm printing) has a value of `SummaryBulkWriteResult`. Here's [the struct and its fields](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-rust-driver/blob/895f0c157a1ed9a8e168857c4db92c9b0d87a8bc/src/results/bulk_write.rs#L37) in the source code.

Author: Since this ends up giving you the same information as omitting the verbose_results() call, I changed it to print the `update_results` and `delete_results` instead
